---
layout: default
title: Human-Machine Sexualities as Communicative Sexuotechnical-Assemblages
parent: § Sex With Robots and Human-Machine Sexualities - Encounters Between Human-Machine Communication and Sexuality Studies  
grand_parent: S
nav_order: 30 
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

     -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}

.youtube-container {
    position: relative;
    width: 100%;
    height: 0;
    padding-bottom: 56.25%;
}
.youtube-video {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
}

</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Human-Machine Sexualities as Communicative Sexuotechnical-Assemblages
This essay is not the first attempt at connecting more-than-human thought and other close relatives, such as posthumanism, new materialism, vital materialism, or object-oriented ontology to human-machine interactions (e.g., Betlemidze, 2022; Dehnert, 2021; Dehnert & Leach, 2021; Kubes, 2019; Ornella, 2009). For instance, in her critique of Richardson’s absolute stance against sex robots (Campaign Against Porn Robots, n.d.), which is built around a normative conception of “real sex,” Kubes (2019) highlights the hidden, normative assumptions regarding “proper sex” and “proper love,” and asks profound questions: “Does loving and feeling loved necessarily require its object to ‘love back’? Or does it suffice, when the loving person *assumes* that their love is shared? I am leaning toward the latter” (Kubes, 2019, p. 4, emphasis in original). More directly located within a philosophical and ethical approach to HMC, scholars have described what Gerdes (2015) refers to as the social relational turn, specifically as it relates to the moral consideration of robots. Authors such as Coeckelbergh (2010, 2012), Gunkel (2012, 2018), and Gerdes have engaged in an ongoing conversation related to the moral standing of robots, with Coeckelbergh (2010, 2012) and Gunkel (2012, 2018) arguing more strongly for a social relational approach where moral status is not dependent on an entity’s properties but viewed as socially constructed in the situated relationship, and Gerdes arguing for a human-centered framework. As Coeckelbergh (2010) argues, for a social relational approach to robot ethics, “moral significance resides neither in the object nor in the subject, but in the relation between the two” (p. 214). Although the question of moral consideration in the case of sex robots is important, as Ess (2016, 2018) demonstrates, these philosophical issues go beyond the scope of this essay. Nonetheless, in asking these kinds of questions, scholarly debates surrounding social relations, new materialism, and other more-than-human endeavors offer profound challenges to fundamental concepts in *both* SeS and HMC, questioning the concepts of subject, object, their relationship, their respective agency, and more.

Elsewhere (Dehnert, 2021), I have already engaged in a speculative exercise in what I call machine geographies—more-than-human communication geographies of humanmachine encounters. In addition to the philosophical efforts related to the social relational turn described above, I employed geographical registers of agency, aesthetics, and ecology to outline what more-than-human approaches to HMC can look like. This includes, perhaps most profoundly, a recasting of agency in human-machine interactions as “relational, assemblage, fluid, in-between actors, as making-with, as achievement within networks, and becoming,” thereby bypassing any considerations of communicative subject and object (Dehnert, 2021, p. 1154). Resonating with the aforementioned social relational turn, a more-than-human perspective allows for recasting human-machine interaction as relation. By focusing on relationality and the entanglements of humans and machines, scholars are not occupied with drawing fixed boundaries between humans and machines or with determining subject- and object-status in communicative encounters, but can embrace a “shift in focus from epistemological questions—such as what the objects ‘represent’—to ontological questions about the kinds of qualities that they help to materialise or enact” (Flore & Pienaar, 2020, p. 283).

SeS scholars have also called for a similar shift in their respective field to move understandings of sexuality away from person-based definitions. The fields of sexual science and sexology are continuously critiqued by the more humanities- and critical-leaning SeS for medicalizing and “healthicizing” sexuality (notions such as “healthy sex drive” or “healthy sex behavior”), pathologizing and erasing non-normative sexual behaviors and identities, and for the continued ignorance toward the whiteness and racialized cisheterosexism so prominent among social scientific approaches to sex and sexuality (e.g., Balestrery, 2012; Flore, 2014; Irvine, 1990; Manalansan, 2013; Somerville, 1994). Work such as Balestrery’s explication of compounded colonization highlight the mutually informing and enforcing, racialized and sexualized ideological paradigms in sexology and sexual science. Efforts by Marxist feminists showcase the intricated connections between market-driven and labor-related notions of sex as a transaction in a neoliberal context, particularly as it relates to consumption (e.g., Miller-Young, 2014; Zatz, 1997). Similarly, studies of racialized sexualities (cf. Ferguson, 2007), specifically Black sexualities of anti-respectability in the context of sex work among Black queer women femmes (Glover & Glover, 2019) or Black women in pornography (Miller-Young, 2014) challenge not only the alive-and-well scientific racism and pathologizing of non-normative sexual subjectivities, practices, and identities, but also call for theorizing from the perspective of those marginalized by normativities constituted around white, cishetero, abled, settler perspectives.

Together, these critical endeavors in SeS understand sexuality not as the “biological, psychological and social processes associated with sexual desire, sensation, arousal, attraction and pleasure” (Fox & Alldred, 2013, p. 785n1), but as a sociohistorical formation that is constructed, imbricated by stratified formations of power, and itself a stratifying force on a societal level (Foucault, 1978). Such a shift away from a person-centered approach to sexuality resonates with Martinez’s (2011) musings on the communicative nature of sexuality, the study of which means “to locate the phenomenon of sexuality within the intricacies of our immediate and embodied interconnection with the social and cultural world in which we are situated” (p. 11). Thusly reframed, sexuality is no longer confined to the property of persons nor the “intimate” spaces between people, or around one person individually, but is conceptualized as a fundamental mechanism of and in societies—a social technology in the Foucauldian sense—that both disciplines bodies while opening up space for resistance. In this sense,

> sexual agency [is] not merely [understood] as the capacity to choose, engage in, or refuse sex acts, but as a more profound good that is in many ways socially based, involving not only a sense of oneself as a sexual being but also a larger social dimension in which others recognize and respect one’s identity. (Wilkerson, 2011, p. 195)

Additionally, Martinez (2011) highlights that this revisited notion of sexuality “is actualized only by the virtue of communicative processes in which we are always and inescapably *situated*” (p. 11, emphasis in original). Resonating with a social relational turn in the moral consideration of robots (Coeckelbergh, 2012), then, these perspectives prioritize the situated relation in the description of sexuality over entities’ ontological properties.

This challenge to person-based understandings of sexuality and communication, as well as sexual and communicative relations and agency, can be further complemented by Deleuzo-Guattarian (1988) perspectives on assemblage. Drawing from anti-essentialist, anti-humanist, and Deleuzo-Guattarian thought, Fox and Alldred (2013) offer sexualityassemblage as a theoretical move that overturns anthropocentric specters of sexuality focused on the individual human body. In their thick, sociological rethinking of sexuality as assemblage, they shift “the location of sexuality . . . toward the affective flow within assemblages of bodies, things, ideas and social institutions, and the (sexual) capacities produced in bodies by this flow” (p. 770). This rethinking of sexuality as assemblage, in relational, ecological, and interconnected ways, resonates strongly with the similar shift in HMC outlined above. Not only do Fox and Alldred draw on similar theoretical bodies of thought, they also apply Deleuze and Guattari’s notion of assemblages as desiring-machines to highlight the role of affective flows, processual interactions, and the dissolution of sexual subjectobject pairings when shifting to sexuality-assemblage (e.g., Deleuze & Guattari, 1988). Unlike person-based notions of sexual agency, then, Fox and Alldred (2013) consider agency as the “capacity to affect or be affected” (p. 772) and dislocate any considerations regarding sexual object-choice or musings on the object of someone’s desire by pointing out that “productive desire makes affect flow in assemblages” (Fox & Alldred, 2013, p. 773). Crucially, this shift toward assemblage allows Fox and Alldred to reconceptualize sexuality as “*the flow of affect in a sexuality-assemblage,*” manifesting in two ways: First, sexuality as the “deterritorializing, nomadic and rhizomic flow of affect between and around bodies and other relations” as a sociohistorical formation that suffuses much if not all of social life, and second, in the form of individual sexual desire, as a “territorialization of an impersonal, non-human and nomadic sexuality” (pp. 767–777, emphasis in original). This approach allows for recasting anthropocentric, humanist idea(l)s of sexuality, sexual agency, desire, resistance, and the relevance of sexuality as “a fundamental experience of what it means to be human” (Ornella, 2009, p. 318; Flore, 2014).

In their more-than-human work on “data-driven intimacy” and teledildonics, Flore and Pienaar (2020) adapt Fox and Alldred’s (2013) sexuality-assemblage and explicitly connect it to technology such as data, algorithms, and wireless sex toys. They offer nuance to Fox and Alldred’s (2013) above conceptualization of sexuality-assemblage and outline what they term sexuotechnical-assemblage, “a term that points to the range of actors and relations imbricated in teledildonic sex [and in human-machine sexualities, I would add], including human bodies and desires, sexual practices, technological devices, internet connections, intimate data, and neoliberal understandings of sexual health” and normative sexual desire, practices, and identities (Flore & Pienaar, 2020, p. 285).

Together, machine geographies (Dehnert, 2021) and sexuotechnical-assemblage (Flore & Pienaar, 2020; Fox & Alldred, 2013) allow for reimagining human-machine sexualities in important and useful ways. First, assembled sexual and communicative (or sexuocommunicative) relationalities between humans and machines ultimately displace questions that seek to investigate the ways in which machines emerge as communicative and sexual subjects in human-machine encounters. This does not imply a recurse to casting machines as mere objects or channels of human-human interaction and desire, given that assemblage simultaneously displaces the object. In this way, directionality of both desire and communication in (sexual) human-machine encounters is bypassed in favor of entangled, relational, affective, and aesthetic flows.

Second, adopting the perspective of sexuotechnical-assemblage for human-machine encounters reconceptualizes ongoing scholarly concerns regarding machine agency by displacing humanist attempts at locating agency within the machine. For instance, in their rich treatise on the foundations of erobotics (the transdisciplinary field concerned with artificial erotic agents), Dubé and Anctil (2021) describe erobots as agents by using the “broadest definition recognized and commonly used” in AI, robotics, and machine learning, where “the agency of machines refers to their capability to act intelligently in and on the world to achieve objectives of their own” (p. 1207). Reconceptualizing agency as not inherent to a machine agent also speaks to the aforementioned social relational turn in the moral consideration of robots. In this vein, communicative sexuotechnical-assemblage focuses on the affective flow between inter-actants in relational, ecological, and assembled relations.

Third, the assemblage-perspective offers generative, alternative conceptualizations in response to, arguably decidedly, anthropocentric entry points into philosophical, ethical, and feminist conversations related to sex robots. For instance, in his ethical musings on the possibility of sex, love, and intimacy with sex robot, Ess (2018) concludes that “sexbots, as zombies lacking first-person phenomenal consciousness, genuine emotions, and (embodied) desire, will only be able to fake emotions” (p. 253). For Ess (2016, 2018), then, due to these shortcomings, it will be impossible to reach “complete sex,” a high ethical standard for sexual relationships which is characterized by mutual desire and respect. Albeit holding a more radical position, the arguments put forth by what Danaher (2019a) calls “anti-sexbot feminism” (e.g., Campaign Against Porn Robots, n.d.; Richardson, 2016a, 2016b) take a similar stand toward what qualifies as proper, good, or authentic sex, which is therefore only limited to human-human sexuality. In response to these arguments, Danaher (2019a) draws on sex-positive feminist perspectives to articulate how we might build better sex robots, rather than follow Richardson and others’ call for restricting them (see also Danaher & McArthur, 2017; Danaher et al., 2017). Pointing out the necessity for feminist insights into the content, process, and context for their creation, Danaher’s (2019a) work represents the potential for conjoining critical perspectives of sex robots with their production. Importantly, an assemblage-perspective as argued for in this essay does not sidestep these important conversations, which matter in the context of child sex robots, for instance (Danaher, 2019b). Rather, it allows for alternative entry points that seek to increase the degree of theoretical elaboration of human-sex robot relations (Döring et al., 2020).

And, finally, by displacing concerns related to subject-object divides as well as notions of individualized agency, the assemblage-perspective both implicates the sociocultural in the intimate, and the intimate in the sociocultural. Returning to Fox and Alldred’s (2013) language of (de)territorializing sexuality, they recognize that, while affective flows of/in sexuality-assemblages are unrestricted, they are often highly limited (“territorialized”) based on individual and sociocultural contexts: “Sexual attraction, sexual preferences and proclivities are . . . territorializations toward particular objects of desire, consequent upon the particular mix of relations and affects deriving from physical and social contexts, experience and culture” (p. 775). As such, an assemblage-perspective is neither naïve toward norms and normativities (or scripts, cf. Dehnert & Leach, 2021) nor forecloses resistance and a rescripting of these cultural norms; in fact, the territorializing, deterritorializing, and reterritorializing dynamics within the sexuality-assemblage allow for resisting, reshaping, and transforming compulsory forms of sexuality (Emens, 2014; Flore, 2014). Therefore, human-machine sexualities as assemblage offer ripe entry points for critical approaches, both from an HMC and an SeS perspective.

***

#### Table of Contents
{: .no_toc}

<ul><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-1/">HMC and the Machine-Other</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-2/">Sex Robots - A Controversial Technology and/in HMC</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-3/">Human-Machine Sexualities as Communicative Sexuotechnical-Assemblages</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-4/">Implications for HMC and SeS</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-5/">Conclusion</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-6/">Author Biography</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/S/Sex-With-Robots-and-Human-Machine-Sexualities-Encounters-Between-Human-Machine-Communication-and-Sexuality-Studies-7/">References</a></li></ul>

***

</div>
